Feature: Add Support for XML Compliance (#708)
nautobot/nautobot-app-golden-config: docs/user/app_feature_compliancexml.md

# Navigating Compliance Using XML

XML based compliance provides a mechanism to understand device configurations stored in XML format and compare between them.

## Defining Compliance Rules

Compliance rules are defined as XML `config-type`.

> The `config to match` field is used to specify an XPath query. This query is used to select specific nodes in the XML configurations for comparison. If the `config to match` field is left blank, all nodes in the configurations will be compared.

Reviewer: can you link instructions to how to build the xpath query?

### XPath in Config to Match

XPath (XML Path Language) is a query language for selecting nodes from an XML document. In our application, XPath is used in the `config to match` field to specify which parts of the device configurations should be compared.

Here are some examples of XPath queries that can be used in the `config to match` field:

![Example XML Compliance Rules](../images/compliance-rule-xml.png)

## Device Config Compliance View

> ![Config Compliance Device View](../images/device-compliance-xml.png)

Reviewer: Can you talk through the example, like how to read the output?

# Navigating Compliance Using XML

> XML based compliance provides a mechanism to understand device configurations stored in XML format and compare between them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
XML based compliance provides a mechanism to compliance check device configurations stored in XML format.
```

## Defining Compliance Rules

Compliance rules are defined as XML `config-type`.

The `config to match` field is used to specify an XPath query. This query is used to select specific nodes in the XML configurations for comparison. If the `config to match` field is left blank, all nodes in the configurations will be compared.

### XPath in Config to Match

XPath (XML Path Language) is a query language for selecting nodes from an XML document. In our application, XPath is used in the `config to match` field to specify which parts of the device configurations should be compared.

### Basic XPath Syntax

Here is a quick reference for basic XPath syntax:

| Expression | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `nodename` | Selects all nodes with the name "nodename" |
| `/` | Selects from the root node |
| `//` | Selects nodes in the document from the current node that match the selection no matter where they are |

> For more detailed information on XPath syntax, you can refer to the [Supported XPath syntax](https://docs.python.org/3/library/xml.etree.elementtree.html#supported-xpath-syntax).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more detailed information on XPath syntax, you can refer to the [Supported XPath syntax](https://docs.python.org/3/library/xml.etree.elementtree.html#supported-xpath-syntax).

This NTC [blog](https://blog.networktocode.com/post/parsing-xml-with-python-and-ansible/) also covers XPath in more details.
```

Here are some examples of XPath queries that can be used in the `config to match` field:

![Example XML Compliance Rules](../images/compliance-rule-xml.png)

## Device Config Compliance View

![Config Compliance Device View](../images/device-compliance-xml.png)

## Interpreting Diff Output

The diff output shows the differences between the device configurations. Each line in the diff output represents a node in the XML configurations. The node is identified by its XPath, and the value of the node is shown after the comma.

Here's a sample 'missing' output:

```text
/config/system/aaa/user[1]/password[1], foo
/config/system/aaa/user[1]/role[1], admin
/config/system/aaa/radius/server[1]/host[1], 1.1.1.1
/config/system/aaa/radius/server[1]/secret[1], foopass
/config/system/aaa/radius/server[2]/host[1], 2.2.2.2
/config/system/aaa/radius/server[2]/secret[1], bazpass
```

> This diff output represents the 'missing' portion when comparing the actual configuration to the intended configuration. Each line represents a node in the XML configuration that is present in the intended configuration but missing in the actual configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This diff output represents the 'missing' portion when comparing the actual configuration to the intended configuration. Each line represents a node in the XML configuration that is presented in the intended configuration but is missing in the actual configuration.
```
